Adyapeath temple

Adyapeath Temple is another Hindu temple built in 1967. It had initially established in 1915 by the followers of Annada Charan Bhattacharya, a great devotee of Maa Kali and Sri Ramakrishna. Adyapeath temple timings are from 04:30 am to 07:00 pm.

Adya Ma Temple, the divine form of Ma Kali, holds great religious significance. The main altar of the temple has three sub-altars. At the bottom is the idol of Sri Ramakrishna, in the middle is our adya, and the top peetha has the model of Radha and Krishna.

History of adyapeath temple (DREAMS AND VISIONS)

In 1915, a young Brahmin named Annada Charan Bhattacharya was setting up a successful practice in Ayurvedic medicine in Calcutta. A capable scientist, he had discovered seven patent medicines and went on to become a renowned doctor all over Bengal. Annada Thakur, as he came to be known, was a deeply religious man, filled with devotion to the Divine Mother Kali and Her great nineteenth-century Bengali saint, Sri Ramakrishna. Nevertheless, even such a spiritual man as Annada was taken aback by the strange visions and dreams he began to have: A vision of four girls carrying an image (murthi) of the Divine Mother Kali down a Calcutta street, invisible to all but Annada, yet so real that he folded his palms and, to the puzzlement of passersby, bowed to thin air. Two dreams of a sannyasin telling him to shave his head and bathe in the Ganges, to which the outraged Annada replied, “Reverend Sir, if you again talk of head-shaving, I shall hold you by the neck and push you out of the room.” Then, stranger yet, dreams of Sri Ramakrishna himself, so real that Annada was convinced the venerable saint, though long departed from this life, had been in the room with him. When the order came from Sri Ramakrishna to shave his head and bathe in the Ganges, Annada could hardly refuse. Sri Ramakrishna then told him to go to the Eden Gardens, a magnificent British-built public garden in Calcutta, and to look there for a murthi of the Divine Mother where a coconut tree and a pakur tree grew together. There, at the bottom of a pond, Annada and three companions found the image. A commemorative plaque marks the spot today.

About the temple

Dream visitations from Sri Ramakrishna also continued. He offered Annada moksha, but Annada, confronted by a vision of thousands of his suffering fellow humans, responded, “I do not care for liberation. I would rather go through a hundred thousand hells doing good to others: This is my religion.” In 1919, Sri Ramakrishna revealed what Annada’s life’s work was to be: the establishment of a temple to the Divine Mother Adya Ma. The temple was to be in reality three temples enveloping one another: the first to Sri Ramakrishna, the second to Adya Ma, and the third to Krishna and Radha. The altar was to be three altars built like large stairsteps: Ramakrishna on the bottom, Adya Ma in the middle, and Krishna and Radha on the top, encircled by the sacred syllable om. In conjunction with the temple, there were to be separate ashrams for men and women, boys’ and girls’ orphanages and schools, a free clinic to prevent the spread of contagious disease, and distribution of food and clothing to the poor. At Sri Ramakrishna’s behest, Annada Thakur spent a year with his parents in Raujan, in what is now Bangladesh, and then returned to Calcutta and carried out spiritual practices for a year on the bank of the Ganges. Then, on January 14, 1921, a celebration was held, which is still celebrated at the temple as Siddhotsab. The same year a committee was formed for the establishment of the Dakshineswar Ramakrishna Sangha. In early 1927, the Sangha acquired a piece of land with some adjoining old Shiva temples, and on January 31, 1928, Annada Thakur broke ground for the temple on a compound of nearly 14 acres.

On which days are adyapith temple open?

The temple opens 3 times in a day, early morning, 10:30-11:30 am, 6:30-7:30 pm. During summer the timing is changed by half an hour. Please check the opening times before going there. The temple is open whole day on 52 days in a year on specific 'tithi'.

How to Reach Adyapeath Temple?

It had located in the Dakshineswar area of Kolkata, which had well connected with all the city areas of Kolkata and Howrah. Visitors can reach here via road, rail and water mode. 

By Rail: Dakshineshwar Railway Station is the nearest railway station, and the Kolkata railway station is around 10 KM from here. Howrah Railway Station is also around 10 KM. Ferry rides and boats are also exciting ways to reach here.

By Air: Netaji Subash Chandra Airport is the nearest airport.