Belur math

Belur Math or Belur Mutt is one of the most popular places to visit in Kolkata. Founded by Swami Vivekananda is the headquarters of the Ramakrishna Math and Mission. 

Notable for its architecture the temple is a beautiful example of Ramakrishna Movement.  The historical paramountcy of this place dates back to 19th century wherein Swami Vivekananda, a disciple of Sri Ramakrishna lived the last years of his life. 

He dedicated the place by worshiping the urn containing the sacred relics of Sri Ramakrishna, which he himself use to carry on his shoulders to the place of worship.


History of Belur Math 

 belur math was established in January 1897, by Swami Vivekananda who was the disciple of Sri Ramakrishna. Swami Vivekananda returned back to India from Colombo with a small group of disciples and started work on the two one at Belur, and the others at Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas called the Advaita Ashrama. 

He inaugrated the Belur Math in 1898; an urn containing the sacred relics of Sri Ramakrishna, was carried by him on his shoulders to the place of worship. “The blazing light of universal harmony that will emanate from here will flood the whole world.” He lived the last years of his life in Belur Math only.

On the campus are various temples like:-
 • Ramakrishna Temple ,
 • Old Ramakrishna Temple ,
 • Swami Brahmananda Temple ,
 • Maa Sarada Devi Temple,
• Swami Vivekananda Temple,
Other places to see here are the old Math, Swami Vivekananda’s mango tree,  Ramakrishna museum, and Swami Vivekananda’s living room.
 
About the temple
A temple in Belur Math
Swami Vivekananda had a lifelong desire to preserve the holy ashes of Ramkrishna. Therefore He decided to enshrine them in a grand and sacred shrine dedicated to his guru, “Shri Ramkrishna Paramhansa.”
This was not possible during Swamiji’s lifetime. So he decided to preserve the mortal remains of Sri Ramakrishna and install his idol in the present ‘old temple.’ However, before his demise, Swamiji had planned a massive temple.

Swami Vijnanananda, his brother’s disciple and a qualified civil engineer, drew the plan following his instructions. Swamiji did not survive until the temple’s completion, but he reassured everyone that he would feel happy and satisfied in the heavenly abode. 

Swami Shivananda laid the foundation stone for Belur Math on the birthday of Sri Ramakrishna (March 13, 1929). Due to a lack of adequate funds, the construction did not begin immediately 
It started only five years later, with significant contributions from Miss Helen Rubel (also known as Bhakti) and Mrs. Anna Worcester (also known as Annapurna). Through their generosity, these two American devotees have become indispensably linked with the history of Ramakrishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission and have won the hearts of all Sri Ramakrishna devotees.

Engineers recommended that the temple be moved about a hundred feet from its original location before initiating the construction. Swami Vijnanananda, the Order’s president, re-laid the foundation on Guru-Purnima, on July 16, 1935.

Shri Ramkrishna’s idol was shifted to the new temple, and indeed it was a ray of hope and joy for the entire community of Shri Ramakrishna’s disciples.


How to Reach Belur Math:
Belur Math has located 6 km from Howrah in Kolkata (W.Bengal)
By car or taxi is the most convenient option. 
Other options are:
Belur Math Bus Route: From Howrah: Bus numbers: 51, 54 and 56
A bus is a good option as they drop you at Belur Math gate
By Train:
Frequent EMU trains from Howrah from early morning to late night will get to Belur Math.  
From Howrah to Belur Math  (Locals)
07:40 – 08:55 – 10:10 – 16:05 – 18:30
By Ferry:
Frequent ferries from Fairlie place to Kutighat.